Walkthrough: Launch from KSC to Low-Earth-Orbit 
Here is walkthrough detailing how to fly your XR vessel from Kennedy Space 
Center efficiently into LEO (Low-Earth-Orbit): 
1. In the Orbiter Launchpad, select your vessel’s Ready for takeoff to ISS
scenario in your vessel’s scenario folder (e.g., XR5 Vanguard). You 
are lined up on the runway at KSC. 
2. Ensure that the APU (Auxiliary Power Unit) is powered on (it is 
controlled by the APU button or CTRL-A). The APU powers your 
hydraulic systems. Also ensure that the AF CTRL switch is set to ON; 
if you forget to do this and you are taking off in an atmosphere, a 
warning callout occurs. 
3. If you will be taking off immediately, skip this step. Otherwise, if you 
want to wait for more than a few minutes before taking off, enable 
external cooling via the switch on the lower panel to keep the ship's 
internal systems cool. You can monitor the internal coolant 
temperature on the lower panel or on the main panel on the MDA 
screen, mode 3 (it should currently be displayed by default). You 
should also shut down your APU (CTRL-A or click the button on the 
panel) so you don’t waste any APU fuel. If you want to conserve 
onboard oxygen as well, open the cabin hatch via CTRL-Y or the switch 
on the upper panel. 
Multi-Display-Area (MDA) Mode #3
The right-hand gauge shows the ship’s internal coolant temperature: 
32.6 degrees Centigrade. The remainder of the display shows external 
hull temperatures, which are discussed later. 
4. Once you reach your takeoff time, power up the APU again, close the 
cabin hatch, and disable external cooling via the switch on the lower 
panel. Also double-check that AF CTRL is set to ON. You will need to 
keep the APU online until you reach about 75 km altitude and switch to 
RCS jets for attitude control. 
5. Ready for takeoff! Push the main engines to full power. You will 
notice the Y axis G meter fluctuating as you roll down the runway; this 
is normal. 
6. The computer will call out 100 knots, then V1 (which is Takeoff 
Decision Speed), and finally Rotate: pull up when rotate is called out 
and press ALT-S to engage Airspeed Hold, or throttle back to about 
40% manually. As the ship goes airborne, by default the computer 
will call out Wheels Up, which is a pilot term that means "the wheels 
are off the ground." It does not mean that the gear has been 
retracted. NOTE: you can change or disable the liftoff and touchdown 
callouts by editing your vessel’s configuration file; refer to the 
LiftoffCallout and TouchdownCallout properties in the file for 
details.
7. Once you are airborne raise the gear with G. Turn smoothly to 136 
degrees (or whatever your ascent heading is), level out, press SPACE 
BAR to disengage Airspeed Hold, and push the main engines to full 
power. Pitch up to about 70 degrees. Do not engage the SCRAM 
engines yet! As you accelerate you will hear a sonic boom as you 
pass through Mach 1 unless you have disabled the sonic boom sound 
in your vessel’s configuration file. 
8. Once you approach 24-28 km altitude, level out smoothly and begin to 
accelerate to Mach 3.5 (XR1/XR2) or Mach 4.5 (XR5) and open the 
SCRAM doors if they are not already open (CTRL-G or use the switch 
on the upper panel). Adjust the elevator trim controls to maintain level 
flight (CTRL-. and CTRL-, or INS and DEL). Once you reach your 
target velocity, push the SCRAM engines to full power and gradually 
throttle back the main engines until they are shut down. Keep an eye 
on the thrust generated by the SCRAM engines; if you throttle back 
the main engines too soon, the SCRAM engines will not be able to 
accelerate the ship by themselves. Adjust the elevator trim controls to 
maintain about +100 m/s (meters-per-second) ascent. If you want to 
you may engage the Attitude Hold autopilot at this point (CTRL-L) to 
maintain a smooth ascent profile. 
9. As you accelerate uphill keep an eye on the Dynamic Pressure gauge: 
it should read about 35 kPa at 24 km at Mach 4. Adjust your climb 
rate via elevator trim to gradually decrease dynamic pressure until it 
reaches ~10 kPa at 40 km altitude. Then adjust elevator trim or 
Attitude Hold settings to maintain 10kPa. Note: you may need to 
adjust your ascent profile somewhat depending on the vessel you are 
flying and its payload mass.
10.When the sky becomes dark, switch your secondary HUD mode to 
mode 2 (press the 2 Secondary HUD button or press CTRL-2 on the 
keyboard). This will switch to a transparent HUD with different data 
fields useful during ascent. Remember that you can customize each of 
the five secondary HUD modes via your vessel’s configuration file. 
11.You will notice the fuel flow and, correspondingly, the thrust for the 
SCRAM engines, increase as velocity increases up until the fuel flow 
reaches the maximum flow rate. The flow rate determines the 
maximum amount of fuel the engine can burn, and therefore the 
maximum thrust the engine can produce. 
12.You will also notice as speed increases the SCRAM TSFC (ThrustSpecific Fuel Consumption) will go down, which means the engines are 
being more efficient. As speed increases beyond Mach 7-9, however, 
engine efficiency will gradually decrease. This is normal and is due to 
a combination of two factors: 1) the shape and design of the engines, 
and 2) the decreasing delta between the compressed freestream 
temperature and the SCRAM burner temperature as velocity increases. 
13.Use elevator trim (CTRL-, and CTRL-. or INS and DEL) to maintain a 
smooth, gradual ascent as you accelerate. Adjust ascent rate to keep 
dynamic pressure around 10 kPa. Try to fly smoothly by making small 
adjustments to the elevator trim. As your velocity and altitude 
increase, adjust your ascent rate to keep lowering dynamic pressure 
gradually below 10 kPa down to about 4 kPa. For optimum efficiency, 
you want to have enough oxygen for the SCRAM engines to operate at 
peak thrust but still have minimal extra air resistance. 
14.If you fly your ascent correctly (and assuming no payload), at about 
60 km you should reach Mach 20+ before the SCRAM engines 
approach their thermal limit or run out of fuel, with ~60% main fuel 
remaining (with the default fuel ISP settings). You may want to keep 
a few percent of your SCRAM fuel in reserve in case you need it later 
during reentry if you are short of the base by a few hundred 
kilometers. If that occurs, remember to engage the SCRAM engines at 
velocities greater than Mach 4, and preferably about Mach 7-9; below 
Mach 4, the TSFC is much higher because the engines make much less 
thrust for a given amount of fuel. The engines operate at peak 
efficiency around Mach 7-9. 
15.Once you shut down the SCRAM engines, close the scram doors! 
(CTRL-G, or use the switch on the upper panel.) If you don't do this 
and you engage the main engines, the SCRAM engines will begin to 
overheat because the temperature of the diffuser (which compresses 
the incoming air) is directly proportional on the velocity of the 
freestream. Overheating the SCRAM engines may damage them or 
even destroy the ship if you overheat them too much! 
16.After you close the SCRAM doors, push the main engines to full power 
and pitch up about 10 degrees initially. Then adjust pitch to enter 
your desired orbit as you ascend smoothly. Once your apoapsis 
altitude (ApA on the Orbiter MFD) reaches 200 km, shut down the 
main engines. Note that you are not in orbit yet, but you have to wait 
until you reach apoapsis (the “high point” of your orbit) before burning 
your main engines again to raise your periapsis (the “low point” of 
your orbit). 

